BGKP SYSTEM DESIGN
Version 1.4

1. DOCUMENT PURPOSE

This document describes the latest evaluated version of the Bounded
Gossip-Based Kernel Protocol (BGKP). BGKP supports periodic vehicle data
collection and state-based emergency dissemination in fragmented
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs).

The implementation targets Contiki-NG. The evaluated simulation version
runs on Sky motes in Cooja, and a preliminary hardware port runs on TI
SimpleLink CC1352R LaunchPad boards.

BGKP is the proposed protocol. FLUD and DUMB are separate baseline
implementations used for comparative evaluation and are not variants of
BGKP.


2. SYSTEM CONTEXT

The system contains two node roles:

Mobile node
    Represents a vehicle. It obtains location and simulation time through
    a UART-based REQ_LOC/LOC interface, generates periodic DATA records,
    detects harsh braking, exchanges messages with nearby mobile nodes,
    stores records during disconnection, and delivers buffered records to
    an RSU when contact becomes available.

Roadside Unit (RSU)
    Acts as an intermittent infrastructure access point and data sink. It
    acknowledges received messages and provides limited local support for
    emergency awareness. The RSU does not perform route discovery,
    backend aggregation, or global coordination.

Communication uses IPv6/6LoWPAN and UDP over IEEE 802.15.4. Nodes make
protocol decisions using local state only. Persistent end-to-end paths
and continuous RSU coverage are not assumed.


3. DESIGN OBJECTIVES

The design objectives are:

1. Support emergency awareness under high mobility and intermittent
   connectivity.
2. Preserve periodic vehicle data during disconnection through bounded
   store-carry-forward buffering.
3. Keep retransmission, local state, and memory consumption explicitly
   bounded.
4. Operate on resource-constrained embedded platforms.
5. Provide observable protocol events for repeatable simulation and
   post-processing.
6. Degrade predictably as connectivity worsens rather than relying on
   persistent routes or unlimited storage.

BGKP is a trade-off design. It is not presented as universally superior
in delivery latency, emergency convergence, or communication overhead.


4. NODE OPERATION

4.1 Mobile-node cycle

A mobile node repeatedly performs the following activities:

1. Requests location and timestamp data through UART.
2. Updates position, speed, and direction estimates.
3. Detects a harsh-braking condition from the change in speed.
4. Sends QUERY messages to discover nearby RSUs and exchange emergency
   awareness state.
5. Generates periodic DATA messages.
6. Uses bounded gossip and acknowledgement feedback when operating
   without direct RSU delivery.
7. Stores undelivered records in a bounded carry buffer.
8. Flushes buffered records to an RSU when RSU contact becomes available.
9. Processes received DATA, EMERGENCY, QUERY, and ACK messages.
10. Emits structured METR records when metric logging is enabled.

4.2 RSU operation

An RSU:

1. Receives QUERY, DATA, and EMERGENCY messages.
2. Returns acknowledgements containing the metadata required to identify
   the acknowledged message.
3. Accepts direct and carried DATA records for metric extraction.
4. Locally rebroadcasts a newly received emergency once, subject to the
   implementation's duplicate-control behaviour.
5. Includes current emergency awareness in acknowledgements where
   supported by the current message payload.

The RSU does not originate periodic vehicle data and does not maintain a
network-wide route or global view.


5. MESSAGE MODEL

5.1 Common frame

All BGKP messages use a common serialized frame with the following
logical fields:

Field               Description
------------------  -----------------------------------------------
Signature           Four-byte ASCII protocol identifier: "BGKP"
Length              Three-byte encoded body length
Marker              Three-byte role marker: "Mbl" or "RSU"
Sender ID           Physical transmitter identifier
Message type        QUERY, ACK, DATA, or EMERGENCY
Message ID          Identifier assigned by the originating node
Target ID           Intended recipient or broadcast value
Origin ID           Original message creator
Payload             Message-specific payload
Timestamp           Creation time in milliseconds
Checksum            Chk8, the low byte of the frame-byte sum

Multi-byte frame metadata is serialized explicitly by the BGKP pack and
parse layer. Payload fields must be interpreted according to the current
structures in bgkp_protocol.h rather than the obsolete payload layouts
from earlier WSAN documents.

5.2 Message types

Value  Name       Purpose
-----  ---------  --------------------------------------------------
0      QUERY      Presence, RSU discovery, and emergency-state exchange
1      ACK        Reception confirmation with acknowledged metadata
2      DATA       Periodic mobility data and dissemination metadata
4      EMERGENCY  Harsh-braking notification and mobility context

5.3 DATA payload

The current DATA payload contains the originating node's mobility state
and dissemination metadata, including:

- x and y position in decimetres;
- speed in decimetres per second;
- direction code;
- RSSI field;
- two preferred-peer identifiers;
- DATA hop budget (TTL).

The originating mobility metrics remain unchanged when a DATA message is
forwarded. The physical Sender ID and remaining hop budget may change at
each forwarding step.

5.4 QUERY payload

QUERY messages carry compact emergency-awareness information where
supported by the current implementation. This allows an arriving node to
learn that an emergency state is active even when it did not receive the
original emergency broadcast.

5.5 ACK payload

ACK messages identify the acknowledged message using its type, origin,
and message identifier. ACK observations are also used by BGKP's
preferred-peer mechanism.

5.6 EMERGENCY payload

The current harsh-braking payload begins with the "EFBR" marker and
contains:

- emergency code;
- x and y position;
- speed;
- direction.

Emergency awareness is state based. The source transmits bounded updates
while the condition remains active. Receivers retain the state for a
bounded lifetime and remove it after expiry if no newer update arrives.
The latest mobile implementation therefore uses expiry rather than the
older mandatory EF_FINISH propagation model.


6. MOBILITY AND EMERGENCY DETECTION

Mobile nodes request data through the UART command interface:

    REQ_LOC

The Cooja scenario script replies with a record in the following form:

    LOC <node_id> <x_dm> <y_dm> <timestamp_ms>

The mobile firmware derives speed and direction from successive samples.
Harsh braking is detected from a sufficiently large speed reduction. The
current evaluated configuration uses:

    HB_THR_DMPS2 = 40
    EF_TTL_MS = 2000
    EF_TX_MIN_MS = 1000
    EF_LED_FORCE_MS = 5000

The red LED may remain visibly asserted for the configured force window,
independently of the shorter protocol-state lifetime.

The hardware validation did not include GNSS input. It verified firmware
execution, IEEE 802.15.4 communication, frame handling, and
acknowledgement behaviour, but not mobility-driven emergency detection.


7. BOUNDED GOSSIP AND PEER SELECTION

BGKP does not establish end-to-end routes. DATA dissemination uses local
broadcast, bounded retransmission, acknowledgement feedback, and a small
preferred-peer list.

Each mobile node maintains two preferred-peer slots. Candidates are
observed during an acknowledgement window. Candidate acceptance uses
local criteria such as movement-direction similarity. A peer remains in
the list until it misses the configured number of complete message
cycles.

The current evaluated defaults are:

    BGKP_T_QUERY_MS = 2000
    BGKP_T_DATA_MS = 1000
    BGKP_T_LOCATION_MS = 1000
    BGKP_T_GOSSIP_MS = 2500
    BGKP_FANOUT_DATA = 3
    BGKP_FANOUT_EF = 3
    BGKP_JITTER_MS = 100
    BGKP_DEDUP_MAX = 64
    BGKP_UNICAST_RETRIES = 3
    BGKP_FRIEND_RETRIES = 3
    FRIEND_MISS_LIMIT = 3
    BGKP_DATA_TTL_DEFAULT = 3

The exact interpretation of a retry constant must follow the current
firmware implementation. In the evaluated code, the constants represent
the bounded transmission cycle used by the relevant sender context.


8. DUPLICATE CONTROL

Nodes maintain a fixed-size duplicate table keyed by message identity.
The current maximum is 64 entries. Duplicate detection prevents repeated
processing and constrains rebroadcast behaviour.

Duplicate control is local. It does not require global coordination or a
network-wide message registry.


9. STORE-CARRY-FORWARD BUFFER

A mobile node stores compact records rather than complete wire frames.
The frame is rebuilt when the record is forwarded or flushed to an RSU.
This reduces storage cost and preserves the original message identity and
mobility metrics.

The current configured carry capacity is:

    BGKP_CARRY_MAX_ITEMS = 16

When capacity is exhausted, the oldest record is evicted. The current
evaluated mobile implementation does not gossip an evicted record before
overwriting it. Memory use therefore remains bounded, but information
may be lost under sustained buffer pressure.

When an RSU becomes available, stored records are rebuilt as BGKP frames
and sent to the RSU. A record is removed after the corresponding
acknowledgement is processed.


10. TIMING AND RSU VISIBILITY

A mobile sends QUERY messages every 2000 ms in the evaluated
configuration. RSU visibility is inferred from acknowledgement activity.
The current mobile implementation uses an epoch-based missed-response
mechanism rather than the older single-query-window rule.

Periodic DATA generation and location polling both use 1000 ms periods.
Disconnected gossip activity uses a 2500 ms period.


11. METRICS AND OBSERVABILITY

When BGKP_METRIC_LOG_ENABLED is set, the firmware emits structured METR
records through UART. These records support calculation of:

- created and RSU-delivered messages;
- packet delivery ratio;
- end-to-end latency;
- transmissions by message type;
- buffer insertion, removal, and eviction;
- emergency creation, reception, forwarding, and convergence.

The post-processing pipeline uses metrics_parser.py to process simulation
logs and GraphsFromBatch.py to produce combined summaries, CSV files, and
plots.

Diagnostic output and preferred-peer monitoring are controlled by
separate build-time flags so that verbose logging can be disabled during
normal experiments.


12. SIMULATION ENVIRONMENTS

12.1 Urban scenario

Urban mobility is produced from OpenStreetMap road data and SUMO traffic
traces. Floating Car Data is converted into Cooja-compatible mobility
records. A Cooja script exposes the current trace position and timestamp
to firmware through the UART REQ_LOC/LOC interface.

The final urban evaluation uses six fixed RSUs and mobile-node densities
from 10 to 90 vehicles. The generated 100-vehicle assets are retained,
but that run was excluded from the final comparative interpretation.

12.2 Highway scenario

The highway environment is generated directly by a Cooja script. Mobile
nodes travel along a simplified bidirectional linear route, while six
RSUs are distributed along the 5 km environment. Mobile-node density is
varied from 10 to 100 vehicles.

Both environments use the same UART location interface, allowing the
firmware to remain independent of the mobility source.


13. HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION

The preliminary hardware port targets TI SimpleLink CC1352R LaunchPad
boards running Contiki-NG. The repository contains BGKP mobile and RSU
firmware plus a platform adaptation layer.

The hardware validation demonstrates:

- successful firmware execution on the boards;
- IEEE 802.15.4 communication through the SimpleLink radio;
- QUERY and DATA handling;
- acknowledgement generation and processing;
- UART-based observation of protocol activity.

The hardware work is a functional proof of portability, not a complete
quantitative hardware evaluation. Location-aware operation and
mobility-triggered harsh-braking detection were not validated because a
GNSS input source was unavailable.


14. BASELINE IMPLEMENTATIONS

FLUD
    Flooding UDP baseline. It rebroadcasts newly observed DATA and
    EMERGENCY messages up to a configured hop limit and uses a compact
    seen-message table for duplicate suppression.

DUMB
    Direct Unicast Minimal Beaconing baseline. It retains the common
    timing and location interface with minimal carry capacity, no
    adaptive gossip fanout, and a simpler acknowledgement-based delivery
    strategy.

The baselines are evaluated under the same scenario inputs as BGKP. They
must not be described as BGKP firmware versions.


15. SECURITY AND LIMITATIONS

The present implementation does not provide application-level
authentication, confidentiality, malicious-node detection, or protection
against forged emergency messages.

The Cooja evaluation uses an abstract IEEE 802.15.4 radio model and does
not reproduce all real-world fading, shadowing, interference, or V2X
stack behaviour.

The completed experiment set contains one run for each
scenario/protocol/density combination and does not quantify run-to-run
variance.

The implementation is a research prototype and is not a production-ready
or safety-certified V2X system.


16. CURRENT RESULTS POSITIONING

The evaluation shows scenario-dependent trade-offs:

- BGKP provides the highest RSU-delivered DATA ratio across the evaluated
  urban densities.
- This urban delivery benefit is accompanied by substantially higher
  latency and absolute transmission overhead.
- BGKP's highway delivery advantage is limited to the lowest densities.
- FLUD generally provides faster emergency convergence in the highway
  scenario.
- BGKP should therefore be understood as a bounded, fragmentation-aware
  trade-off design rather than a universally dominant dissemination
  protocol.


17. SOURCE OF TRUTH

For implementation details, the current source files are authoritative:

- FW/Cooja/BGKP/bgkp_common.h
- FW/Cooja/BGKP/bgkp_protocol.h
- FW/Cooja/BGKP/mbl.c
- FW/Cooja/BGKP/rsu.c
- FW/CC1352R-Launchpad/BGKP/

This document supersedes the earlier "System Design [EN] v0.0.1.txt"
description. Obsolete statements removed from the earlier version
include the old WSAN framing description, temperature and battery DATA
payload, 3000 ms query period, 64-item carry cache, mandatory FINISH
avalanche, and the earlier simplified QUERY and ACK payload descriptions.
